Example cases for PeaceTech Hackathon 2024

CASE I

In Context A, there is a practice where victims/survivors’ pictures are usually posted and shared by authorities or civil society organizations online especially on WhatsApp groups and Facebook groups created by protection groups or individuals. The stated intent might be to seek urgent health or livelihood support for the victim/survivor, or to get support for a call for action demanding the authorities to do more on SV.
This is frequently carried out without considering the impact on the individual; in most cases the victims/survivors have not given their informed consent, additionally someone persons sharing such content claim the victims/survivors have given verbal consent, but it is often uninformed and/or subject to several different constraints.

CASE II

In Context B, digital SV might be a tool by armed actors to extort and threaten victims/survivors, resulting in their displacement. Cases could be of women who either refused to become the girlfriend of an armed group member, refused to allow their child to become involved in the group, refused to be extorted, and/or filed a complaint for a case of SV perpetrated by the group which would have been leaked.
The groups would continuously create new WhatsApp accounts to reach the individual and threaten her and her family (even after changing phone numbers/WhatsApp accounts several times and/or blocking the previous numbers). Eventually, many of these victims/survivors would have no choice but to displace internally, and in some cases, migrate outside of their countries to seek safety abroad.

Another threat could consist of stealing the victims’ phones and use their WhatsApp/social media to extort family members for ransom, linked to the threat of SV being perpetrated against their loved ones. In some cases, photos and videos of gang rape would be taken and victims/survivors would be threatened with having them sent to their family members if they ever tried to report the case.

CASE III

Armed groups might use Facebook and other modes of social media to sexually harass local girls in their communities that would otherwise be out of physical reach. This could be done under the premise of “flirting” with the armed actor stating they would like the girl to become their girlfriend. Using these digital means, armed actors will create a relationship of trust and convince the girls to meet them in person. Once they do, these “relationships” might become very exploitative resulting in forced recruitment, forced prostitution, or even sexual slavery.

CASE IV

Armed groups might use WhatsApp, Facebook, and other online networks to post fake job advertisements in the local towns (e.g., usually for cooks, cleaners, etc.) targeting women and girls in urban communities where there are limited economic opportunities. Socioeconomically vulnerable women might respond to these adverts and be promised legitimate job opportunities in line with the advert and their job expectations. After arriving, armed groups would tell them they were expected to engage in sex work (e.g., forced prostitution). Some of the women and girls would become the “girlfriend” of a specific leader of the armed group (i.e., sexual slavery) to prevent being forced into prostitution.

CASE V

There have been several reports over the years from survivor-led organizations based in Context C as well as from refugees in other countries describing how women who were arrested and detained would be filmed during acts of sexual violence. As part of the interrogation tactics, the women would usually be threatened with sending of the videos to their family members unless they signed a false confession.

In other cases, the videos would be sent without the victims/survivors knowledge to fighters from their area as a form of humiliation. Some men also reported having been forced to watch videos of sexual violence perpetrated in detention (i.e., forced witnessing) or forced to perpetrate SV while being filmed as part of their torture during interrogation; some male soldiers have reported being forced to watch these videos by other men within their unit. In Syria, several of these cases were documented in reports from EuroMed, HRW, the Al Jazeera documentary Silent War, and several articles from the Independent, Reuters, and others). The OHCHR Independent Commission of Inquiry for Syria has also mentioned some of these practices in previous reports on SGBV and detention (2018 is the most detailed).
